KallistiOS 1.1.6
(c)2000-2001 Dan Potter and Jordan DeLong of Cryptic Allusion


OVERVIEW
--------
KallistiOS is a pseudo-real-time pseudo-microkernel operating system for
gaming consoles, licensed under the terms of the *new* BSD license (the one
without the advertising clause). It has currently been ported to the 
Dreamcast* and Gameboy Advance* platforms.

Depending on whether you wish to see the fnords, you can pronounce it
"kallisti-o's" (like a cereal) or "kallisti o s" (like an operating
system). We like the former since it's silly to be so serious most of the
time =). "Kallisti" means "to the fairest" in Greek. This was the word (so
the story goes) that was inscribed on the golden apple that Eris threw
into the banquet of the gods to start the Trojan war. This somehow landed
her the title of matriarch of a silly religion called Discordianism, which
is what the name pays homage to. If you want a short abbreviation, you can
also refer to it as "KOS", which can be pronounced "k-os" (chaos) =).

Note that this name is _not_ to be confused or associated with either the
professional development company Kalisto Software* or the cracking group
"Kalisto".

Now that that is cleared up... =)

Like most embedded kernels, KallistiOS has two major modes of operation. 
In the first mode, it can be linked directly into a program. In this case
you have very fine control over what gets included in the binary and how
and when it is initialized. It is also by far the simplest way to make use
of it (hearken back to the days of libdream...). This mode is now considered
the default method of using KallistiOS and will be the best supported in the
future.

The second mode is potentially more versatile and fun. You can run the
standalone KallistiOS binary and have it load programs and multitask like
a regular OS. The virtualized file system is used in this loading process,
so the first (and subsequent) loaded binaries can be sitting on a CD,
embedded in the kernel, or even come across from a PC debugger host. 

Note that although "os mode" encourages the use of threads and a file system,
it may be taylored to fit your needs. Likewise, the library mode may use
threads and the VFS.

What KallistiOS is primarily:
- Processor manager (threads, MMU, store queues, DMA, exceptions, etc)
- Pseudo-POSIX layer (printf, files, threads, etc)
- DC HAL (hardware abstraction layer)

What KallistiOS provides optionally:
- Process management (ELF binary loading, process spawning, etc)
- Optional complex OS services (simple windowing system, etc)

What KallistiOS is NOT:
- UNIX (or even compatible)
- Linux/BSD (those are their own ports! =)
- Memory protected; programs can overwrite eachother at will
- Pretty much anything else you can think of that's not in the above list

If you're looking for all these features in a solid proven kernel, then
look no further than Linux-SH or NetBSD/DC. On the other hand, if you want a
simple kernel that you can grok in a few hours and use simply, use KallistiOS!

As an aside, if you are interested in a skeleton version of KOS that uses
the MMU and memory protection, a real process model, etc, check out
KOS-MMU. It's not being worked on any more but it has some interesting
code in it and is a very clean example of a simple OS.


LICENSING
---------
Please read the file "LICENSE" for more information about this subject.
This program is now distributed under a similar set of terms as earlier
ones (libdream), and has changed since KallistiOS 0.7 (GPL). Even so,
some of the software distributed with KOS (newlib math routines, Xing
MP3 engine) are under different licenses. Please read "LICENSE" if in
doubt!

This software is based in part on the work of the Independent JPEG
Group (see addons/libjpeg/README).

I have also added a somewhat informative "licensing" section to the FAQ.

If in doubt, please contact us. If you want to use KOS in a project, we'd
love to hear from you anyway!


BUILDING
--------
Building KallistiOS from source entirely requires two things:
- GNU Binutils / GCC, cross-compile to the platform of your choice; for
  DC this is a compiler targeted for "sh-elf", and for GBA this is
  a compiler targeted for "arm-elf". See below about version notes.
- GNU Binutils / GCC / GNU Make for your host platform

If you don't have any of the above, please see "gnutools.txt" in the
documents directory for more info on obtaining and/or building them.

On the DC, you'll want GCC 3.0.3. It's far better than the 2.9x series at
this point and even compiles nicely with -O2, unlike previous versions.
The default optimization setting in the enclosed environ files is -O1,
but if you have 3.0.3 you can safely crank this up to -O2 now.

On the GBA, GCC 3.0.0 is also the build you want to use. It includes
the new ARM-supplied backend for that CPU target. It also provides a
compiler that works with both ARM and Thumb mode code, including
interworking (though good luck getting that to work!).

Building is actually quite simple, especially if you don't want to add
new sections for yourself. If you are lucky and 'configure' works for
you, then you will not have much work to do. Simply run './configure'
when you are in the KOS install directory and it will compile any
neccessary utils and lead you through the configuration process in a
wizard-like manner. (NOTE: as of KOS 1.1.0, 'configure' is currently
broken, so I haven't included it.)

If that does not work for you for some reason, you may need to build
genromfs yourself (if you are not running on Linux and have it
available), and you will need to edit environ.sh or environ.tcsh to suit
your setup. Please see environ.sh.sample and environ.tcsh.sample in the
'doc' directory.

You'll need both the SH-4 and ARM sets of tools to build the full OS from
scratch, though this is not required. A precompiled binary is included for
the ARM7 code used by default.

After you have a working environ script, run it with 'source environ.sh'
or 'source environ.tcsh' (depending on your shell) and run your make
program. For BSD people this will be 'gmake', otherwise it will probably
be just 'make'. It should be done after a few minutes. If something goes
wrong, please check the FAQ; if that fails, email one of us and we'll see
what we can do. I recommend putting the 'source' line above into your
shell's .rc/.login.

This process should work (and has been tested) under Linux, BSD, and
Cygwin. It is very doubtful that it will work in any non-Unix
environment.


NEW VERSION CODES
-----------------
As I may or may not have mentioned, we are switching to a Linux-style
versioning system with KOS. All KOS versions are now composed of three
sections: major, minor, micro. Major revisions are generally something
that changes the OS fundamentally, or when we run out of single-digit
major version numbers =). For example, the change in 1.0.x -> 1.1.x
where we moved from an OS style target to a library style target as the
main goal will probably result in the next "stable" release being 2.0.0.
The minor version number is used to denote a development series. Even
numbered minor versions are considered stable, while odd-number versions
are considered unstable, incomplete, etc. When we feel like significant
progress has been made since the last stable release, we'll make a new
stable release. Finally, the micro version denotes a sequence in the
development series. 1.1.0 would be the first snapshot of the 1.1
development series.

As this is 1.1.x, it is an unstable "hacker-only" release. So please be
prepared for things to break.


OS MODE IS GONE FOR NOW
-----------------------

The standard KOS 1.0.x "os mode" is now integrated back into the source tree
again, but it is not the default build mode. Instead, it is provided as an
add-on library if you want to use that mode in your programs, and the old
"kernel" tree is provided as a sample "os mode" program.

It still needs some debugging work, and it's not ready for "primetime"
again yet. If you want to build and experiment yourself, please feel
free. Look in the "libos" directory under "addons". Note that OS mode is
a legacy item from KOS 1.0.x, and as such is pretty Dreamcast* specific.

In fact, all of the userland pieces have been removed in this version and
will be put back in a later version. I mainly included as much of "os mode"
as I did to support a few users that are using the OS this way. LwIP
is also gone in this release because some other people have been working
on porting a much newer version and apparently theirs is a lot better 
than mine. ^_^; To be imported later...


PLATFORM NOTES
--------------
Dreamcast*

- The sample image with Kosh has been removed for now until the OS mode
  can be brought back up fully. Instead, there are several library-based
  example programs that come with KOS. Please check those out for examples.
  You can also check out the newly added Kosh "example" =)
- MPGLIB (LGPL MP3 library, which is also faster) is included, but does
  not work. If you want to screw with it yourself, check the libmp3 Makefile
  and look at sndmp3_mpglib.c in that dir.
- I have done some work to bring fs_vmu back to a minimally working state,
  but I realized after starting on it that this code probably hasn't been
  touched since KOS 0.6! It is easily the grossest and most dangerous
  code in the library (especially since it could destroy your saves for
  real DC games) so I recommend extreme caution in either using it for 
  your own projects or enabling support for it in release builds of your
  projects. However, it IS good enough to go into KOSH and use 'cp' to
  transfer save games between memory cards now.
- C++ support is now in KOS, including ctors and dtors. However, you may
  not put any KOS calls in ctors or dtors! This is very important because
  they are run outside of a safely initialized KOS context. All you have is
  basic memory management and libc support (strings, etc). If you want
  STL, you'll need to use STLPort, which I may include in a later version.
- I'm now compiling binary releases with GCC 3.0.3 and -O2.

Gameboy Advance*

- There is not a lot of hardware support yet. IRQs aren't even supported,
  so don't even think about trying to use threads yet =). This port is
  somewhat immature however, so I expect the support to improve over
  time.
- KOS is currently configured to run as Thumb code from the ROM. This can
  be changed by editing the config script to set the compiler flags and
  editing kernel/arch/gba/kernel/startup.s to remove the "bx" call and
  make it a regular jump.
- In future versions I hope to have a more elegant system to combine Thumb
  and ARM mode code (including automated copying of your ARM code into RAM
  with the data segment). You can see the beginnings of this in the linker
  script.


END
---
That's where we leave off here. Now that you have a build and ready copy,
you're ready to get to the more fun things. Please read the other documents
in the "doc" directory for more information. Also check the FAQ if there
is something you were wondering.

Also, please take note of our new web URL (below). We have moved hosting
to SourceForge for all console-related things.


					Dan Potter
					Jordan DeLong
					Cryptic Allusion
					http://dcdev.allusion.net/


* "Sega" and "Dreamcast" are registered trademarks of Sega Enterprises, Ltd. 
  "Nintendo" and "Gameboy Advance" are registered trademarks of Nintendo of America
  Kalisto Software is a registered trademark of Kalisto Software, Inc. 

KOS Version Id: $Id: README,v 1.4 2002/01/14 06:06:32 bardtx Exp $

