KallistiOS 1.1.6 FAQ
(c)2001 Dan Potter

Here you may find some answers to some common questions we hear
regarding the usage of KOS. We will be adding more to this file over
time, but perhaps these can help you get started.


0 --- Licensing ---------------------------------------------------------

0.0

This section is NOT legal advice. It's just a help to people who are
having trouble with the myriad free software / "open source" licenses.


0.1

Q) What is the new BSD/KOS license? What exactly do its terms mean?

Q) Can I make a proprietary / "closed source" program using KOS?

Q) Can I distribute "forked" versions of KOS?

A) The BSD license is pretty well understood among the free software
community, but I'll go ahead and give a layman's description of it here.
Basically what it says is that you can use the code in any of your
programs (proprietary, free/"open source", etc) as long as you don't try
to remove or change the copyright notices, and you don't try to
advertise your program as if it's endorsed by us. You may also
distribute changed versions as long as they are clearly marked as such
(often called a "fork"). This is a layman's description, it is not a
replacement for reading and understanding the license itself. If you
don't understand it, please find a lawyer friend to help you with it.

Sorry for being so terse about this, I'm just sick of "intellectual
property" battles. That and people somehow equate the BSD or X11 license
with "I can rip and use this code with no credit". This is absolutely
false. You may also not include the KOS code (or any other copyrighted
code) in your program verbatim without credit and a copyright notice.
Very small pieces are probably alright, but anything substantial must
have something to the effect of "derived from blagh.c in KOS 1.1.x".


0.2

Q) What is the GPL license? What exactly do its terms mean?

Q) Can I make a proprietary / "closed source" program using XingMP3?

Q) Can I distributed "forked" versions of XingMP3?

A) The GPL says (again, in layman's terms) that if you make a derivative
work (e.g., use its code in your program), then your program must be
distributed under the terms of the GPL. Note that this does not mean you
must change your license, as some people would say (excellent example:
the Linux kernel contains BSD-licensed code, and BSD's kernel contains
_optional_ GPL'd kernel modules). It does, however, mean that you must
follow the GPL's terms for distribution. Additionally, if you make
significant changes to the XingMP3 library (a direct derivative) then
you must make the result licensed under the GPL.

I use XingMP3 as the example here because it is going to be the one
people have the most encounters with in their own programs. Genromfs is
distributed along with KOS (aggregated) but is not part of it. XingMP3,
however, is also "aggregated" but becomes a part of your program if you
link the MP3 playback library. So if you want to do this, pay attention.

This example is most analogous to the BSD kernel situation. They have a
GPL'd math library that may be linked with the BSD kernel, but the
resulting binary must always be accompanied by all of its source code
(i.e., distributed under the terms of the GPL). The same is true with
your own programs. You may not use the MP3 library without following
similar restrictions: you may license it under any GPL-compatible
license, but you may not distribute any part of it as a proprietary
application.

You may distributed "forked" versions of XingMP3, following the same
restrictions. They must be licensed under the GPL license. You may add
entirely new files to the library, licensed under a different license,
but they must be distributable under the GPL's terms.

Now then, if you don't like those restrictions, you are free to replace
the XingMP3 engine with something else. In fact I would be overjoyed if
someone provided me with a BSD-licensed MP3 engine. But for now, those
are the breaks. Sorry.

Also, to keep you safe from accidentally linking GPL'd code into your
program, 100% of this code is located inside the "xingmp3" tree in the
"addons" tree. All headers in the global "headers" tree are either ours
or otherwise BSD-style licensed.


1 --- Kernel and Userland -----------------------------------------------

1.1

Q) What is the difference between linking libkallisti into my program,
and linking libk for a userland program?

Q) I am trying to link libkallisti into my userland program but some
things don't work right.

Q) What is the difference between kernel and userland anyway? What are
the advantages of each?

A) We've heard a lot of these types of questions. Most of the
misunderstandings stem from the fact that both the kernel and the
userland library and examples are distributed in the same package, and
also that you can link the kernel itself into your program. Many people
who are writing DC software have not really had much exposure to a true
embedded environment before and so this confusion is understandable.
Software like QNX Neutrino has worked this way for quite a while, and
that's the model we're supporting with "OS mode".

Basically what you need to do to understand the distinction here is to
think back to whatever OS you are using right now for development, be
this Windows, DOS, a *nix flavor, etc. I'm going to use Linux as an 
example, but the same basic idea is true of any user OS. For Windows,
you could replace "Linux kernel" with "Win32 kernel" and "init" with,
say, "Explorer" (not entirely accurate, but close enough).

There are two very distinct parts to this OS at the top level. Further
down there are more parts, but at the top level there are only two: the
kernel and the userland. The kernel is what is responsible for the
hardware, multitasking, global memory allocation, and allowing programs
to communicate effectively. Generally the kernel itself does not perform
any more tasks than that. The actual functionality is delegated to the
userland, which is generally isolated from the hardware and
multitasking. In Linux, the kernel is what is really called "Linux" --
it is a downloadable piece of code that you can recompile for many
platforms, and it has no function besides managing the hardware and
other global tasks that individual applications should not have to
handle (file systems, networking, etc). This Linux kernel layer is what
lets me do things like run a file manager on both a VFAT partition and
an Ext2FS partition with no changes to the app itself. When Linux boots,
it initializes its hardware and other subsystems, and loads a program
called "init", which is a userland program. This program is isolated
from the kernel, the hardware, and any other userland programs that may
be loaded after it. It also handles the loading of other userland
programs, but that is by OS design.

Now what you can do with Linux is actually pull out its main init
routine, and instead of loading the "init" userland program, you could
make it do something like play MP3s. In this case you are coding
directly at the kernel level, have full access to the machine and all
pieces of the operating system, and are running at the fastest potential
machine speed. You are also at risk of overwriting some important kernel
structure (bringing down the machine unexpectedly) and your kernel has
no other purpose than to play MP3s.

This is a very uncommon practice with OS's like Linux that were designed
as more of a desktop environment. It's a lot more practical with
embedded systems that are designed to be used in things like ATM
machines. In that case the added overhead of actually making a
kernel/userland distinction (both processor time and memory usage) are
not worth the advantages, which are almost nothing for such an embedded
system.

This is the dilemma you get to choose from when you develop a program
using KallistiOS. You can choose to link the kernel directly like a
library, and you will have full control over what happens inside that
kernel. You can enable or disable threads at any time, you can tweak a
lot of internal things in the TA module, etc.

At this time we are not actually planning to produce a standalone
distribution of KallistiOS that can be used like a standalone desktop
system, because the demand just isn't there right now. However, if we
actually did publish a standalone bootable version of KallistiOS, your
program is off limits to all the users of the standalone KallistiOS who
might use that version. They will have to exit and boot into your
version, and that's all that can happen. Permanently, in a fashion,
because you'd have to actually port your program from a kernel-space
program to a userland program before it could cooperate with other tasks
on the system. This is one advantage to using a userland program from
the beginning: it's fairly easy to write a userland app and then port to
a kernel-space one by pulling services like you'd normally do in a
userland app, but it's fairly difficult to go the other way once you
have started tapping into the internals of the kernel.

There are other advantages to writing a userland app as well. For one,
different people may be running different kernels. I could be running on
a hacked up custom bus that includes a hard disk and an ethernet card
like a 3c503, and Joe Schmoe could be running on just the official
broadband adapter. If you are running as a userland program, you will be
using the KOS exported API for network access, and thus it will run on
both machines identically. If you do not, then one or the both of those
people can not use their network access. This is the same problem that
the official Sega software has, since they have basically decided to
link a kernel into their apps. Older apps will never be able to use the
ethernet because they simply don't contain the neccessary driver code.
In an ideal world, there would be one networking API that would take a
few settings (perhaps) and establish a TCP/IP connection without telling
the game what it did. This is much more like the PSX model. Instead,
there is a full stack inside each game, each stack with its own quirks
and abilities.

All isn't rosy: it's a bit of overhead to manage opening the userland
ABI libraries and so on. They will run a bit slower because of the extra
pointer redirection (though on the SH-4, due to the way the C compiler
writes code anyway, this is somewhat negligible). Additionally, all
these advantages I've been talking about with process protection simply
don't exist in the simple world view of KOS right now (there is no MMU
support to prevent apps from trampling on eachother). Writing userland
apps is also not nearly as easy as writing straight kernel-linked
software (again, more like libdream) because there is a paradigm shift
to get around in your head.

At this point, we are no longer recommending that you make userland
apps, because the focus of KOS has shifted to standalone statically
linked applications. However, you may decide later on that you want to
use this feature for something (such as loadable drivers in your game).
So start simple (statically linked mode) and then check out "OS mode"
later if you are interested.

The other thing that has perhaps been confusing people is that you can
include userland binaries and other arbitrary data into the kernel image
itself during compile time. All this does for you is make your files
show up under /bi or /rd. Compiling a userland binary into the kernel in
this way _does not_ imply that it is running as part of the kernel.


1.2
Q) How can I run a userland app that someone else has posted on the web
somewhere?

Q) How can I get my own userland apps to run?

Q) How can I tell a KOS userland app from a Dreamcast raw ELF?

A) KOS binaries, as of version 0.90, have the extension '.klf'. This is
to distinguish the KOS ELF files from raw ELF files.

If a standalone version of KOS is posted, this will be a LOT easier.
However, until that time what you have to do is one of three things:

  - Burn it on a CD with a custom KOS kernel image that loads your
    program from the CD and runs it instead of /rd/init.klf
  - Load your program into the kernel image in place of the default
    /rd/init.klf
  - Use KOS' init.klf, and create an rc.boot script that starts your
    program.

For #1, you just need to change the name of the loaded program from
/bi/init.klf to /cd/yourprogram.klf in kernel/main.c and recompile. For
#2, you'll need to replace kernel/romdisk_boot/init.klf, delete
romdisk_boot.o, and let it recreate the image. #3 should be fairly
self-explanatory. If you didn't understand that, then please hold off
until there's a standalone version.


1.3
Q) How can I use kernel functionality that isn't exported (yet)?

A) Right now the only thing you can do is write the program as a linked
kernel or write a new ABI for yourself. If you want to do #2, let me
know so that we can discuss it and we might include that ABI in the
future release versions.

Note that as of 1.1.0, the ABI support is no longer integrated with the
kernel itself, so that "OS mode" libraries don't have to be linked into
a program that won't use them. Instead, you should add a handler to the
"OS mode" services setup.


2 --- Memory Allocation ------------------------------------------------

2.1

Q) How can I determine how much RAM I have allocated / how much RAM my
program is using? 

A) This won't always be accurate, but in the kernel space you can call
malloc_stats(). The output is sent to the kernel console.


2.2

Q) My malloc()'s are failing. Why?

Q) I tried malloc_stats() and it claims I allocated like four billion
bytes of RAM!

A) You probably have a pointer overrun somewhere. Unfortunately these
are rather difficult to debug for now in KOS since it has no MMU
support. I recommend old school debugging (calling malloc_stats() every
so often to see when it bombs and narrowing it down, or perhaps
commenting out blocks until it works again). Eventually we'd like to
have a Linux version of KOS. Yes, if that sounds weird, see below.

If you are masochistic and want a project to play with, you might want
to download KOS-MMU, which was supposed to become KOS 1.1.x, but turned
out to be too slow, too difficult, and not what people want in general.
Note that some of KOS-MMU's functionality and structure has been
imported into KOS 1.1.x, and its MMU functionality may eventually be
imported as a library for your own use (for mmap()'ing file data, etc).


3 --- VFS ----------------------------------------------------------

3.1

Q) What exactly is this VFS thing? Why should I use it?

A) VFS stands for "virtual file system". All it does is bring together
several disparate name spaces into one convienent API. VFS is the
hallmark of a *nix system: "everything's a file". In KOS that's not
quite that true, but it is handy. For example, you can put a file on a
CD and it shows up in /cd, or you can build it into the kernel and have
it show up in /bi or /rd. In the case of /bi, you could even have dynamic
"files" that change at runtime. Or perhaps it's coming over the network
from your PC in /net. Either way, all your programs will use the same
exact API calls to access the files.


3.2

Q) What VFS modules are available?

A) Presently there are six:

- Builtin -- mounts on /bi, and reads files from an internal array built
into the kernel (thus the name). This lets you embed bootstrap userland
code into the kernel, data files, etc. It's also non-permanent (like a
CDR) so if you are uploading test images you can put test files here. A
little known trick of /bi is that you can put an arbitrary pointer into
the table and tweak both the pointer and the file size at runtime, thus
providing proc-like functionality.

- ISO9660 -- mounts on /cd, and is a decent implementation of the
ISO9660 file system standard used on CDs. Note that because of the
simple nature of KOS's block devices right now, ISO9660 is bound
directly to the CD-Rom device. In the future this may change.

- SerConsole -- mounts on /pc, connects to a PC-hosted program, called
'konsole'. Note that recent versions of dc-load have a similar fs you
can add to KOS that does about the same thing. All the files in the
current directory of konsole will show up here. Note that this doesn't
seem to work right now if you enable threading. This fs and its utility
program are deprecated in KOS 0.90.

- DC-Load Console -- mounts on /pc, connects to a PC-hosted program,
called 'dc-load'. DC-Load is Andrew Kieschnick's BBA/Serial port loader
program. If you use the DC-Load console, then you can read files
directly from your in the /pc directory. The other major advantage (if
you are using a BBA) is that DC-Load will redirect console messages over
the ethernet for you. I haven't personally used it, so I can't tell you
much more than that...

- VMU -- mounts on /vmu, what it sounds like. This dynamic file system
shows all detected VMU or memory cards on the maple bus and lets you
browse and read/write them. Note that it's fairly primitive right now
and has been known to corrupt cards on writing.

- Romdisk -- mounts on /rd. This is an implementation of the Linux ROMFS
file system. Right now it supports nested directories but no listings. As
time goes on I will be working on this to make it more fully functional.


3.3

Q) How can I make images for the romdisk file system?

Q) Where can I get this genromfs program to make ROMFS image for use
with the romdisk file system?

A) This is a Linux utility (it's a Linux-specific file system.. well
it was until a few days ago anyway }-D) called genromfs that does
this for you. Here is a URL:

ftp://sunsite.unc.edu/pub/Linux/system/recovery/genromfs-0.3.tar.gz

Additionally, I have provided a copy of this program for your convienence.
You will need to edit your environ.sh/tcsh to change the paths if you want
it to work "out of the box". If you are using Cygwin you will also need to
make sure there's a /tmp path mount for bin2o's usage.


4 --- Networking ---------------------------------------------------

4.1

Q) Does KOS have any kind of TCP/IP stack? Network support at all?

A) Yes. There is a very primitive and rudimentary driver for the Sega
broadband adapter (an RTL8193C based 10/100 card that doesn't seem to work
all that well at 100); and for TCP/IP there is a port of Adam Dunkel's
lwIP embedded stack. It doesn't work too well, it's more of a toy right
now. I don't recommend trying anything serious with it in this version. It
needs interrupt support and a more direct path to the TCP/IP stack before
it will be usable.


4.2

Q) But, but, but...

A) Ok, alright! =) I was pretty excited too so if you just want to play
with things...

You'll need to edit kernel/main.c and uncomment the lines that start up
the ethernet driver and lwIP. You'll also need to uncomment the line that
shuts down ethernet. Finally, you'll need to edit tcpip/init/kos/init.c
and change the DC's IP address, gateway, and netmask. Recompile and run,
and you should have a working HTTP server on port 80 on your DC. No
guarantees though! And I haven't even tested outgoing connections so I
don't know if they work at all.

Like I said in warning above, not for the faint of heart..


4.3

Q) What about a BSD stack?

A) That seems to be everyone's generic answer to wanting a TCP/IP
stack. Have you actually _looked_ at the BSD stack? Not just glanced
through it at the files and said "oh yep, it's all there!" but really
studied what it would take to do a port? If you're still interested then I
welcome you to attempt a port, but it's not a small task. The biggest
problem would seem to be ripping it out of its BSD home and putting it in
a foreign environment, but with the recent additions of semaphores and
other thread primitives this might not be as hard.


5 --- Building -----------------------------------------------------

5.1 

Q) I'm having an issue building KOS; it gives me errors about not
finding Makefiles or not finding include files.

A) Make sure you check the paths in environ.sh and/or environ.tcsh, and
make sure you are running one of those with the 'source' command (see the
README). If in doubt, use 'set' or 'setenv' to find the environment
variables. You should have a KALLISTIBASE variable.


5.2

Q) I grok the userland thing above, now once the kernel is built, what
do I do with it?

A) You have two choices for running your program: either take the file
kernel/kallistios.bin and upload it over your serial cable or ethernet
card, or scramble it and burn it on a CD; or you can use the Makefile to
do the steps for you if you're using dc-load/dc-tool. The way this works
is to use the 'run' target in the top-level or kernel Makefiles. You
can also modify your Makefile to use something like netcat to send
to Marcus Comstedt's IPLOAD program. This version of KOS seems to work
fine with it (and if you use IPLOAD 1.002, it exits back gracefully
as long as your program didn't do anything weird).


5.3

Q) How can I run my statically linked program?

A) Even easier: your Makefile should generate an ELF file and you can
use one of the available loader programs to upload it directly.


5.4

Q) Where is the source to bin2o? All your other stuff has source...

A) Examine the file more closely. It _is_ the source code =). bin2o is
a bash shell script that runs from a real bash on a *nix, or under the
Cygwin bash. There were some issues with it running under Cygwin 
previously but those should now be fixed.


6 --- Debugging ---------------------------------------------------------

6.1

Q) Is there ever going to be an easier way to develop KOS apps besides
this tedious libdream-like method?

A) Yes, there are two distinct possibilites coming up.

First is developing using a network connection. The way this works is
that we'll have a program like konsole and a VFS like fs_serconsole, but
it uses TCP/IP. This is obviously a little ways off, but it will allow
you to boot KOS itself (perhaps KOSH) and then run programs off your
development machine at will. It will also completely eliminate the need
for a serial cable because all console i/o can happen over ethernet
packets, and the host program will provide NFS-like file sharing.

Second is that we're thinking of implementing KOS under Linux-SH or
NetBSD at some point. This sounds weird but it's one of the advantages
of having a microkernel architecture that works like ours does
(Amiga-style). Amiga themselves are actually doing this in their next
generation AmigaOS. What this gives you is binary API compatability with
KOS, but your program runs under the Linux kernel and gets all of its
memory protection advantages, a debugger, etc. Note that this will
probably only be an option if you are making a userland program.


6.2

Q) I don't have a serial cable so how can I see the debug output?

Q) I want to use the serial line but the pesky kernel debug output is
getting in my way.

Q) I am writing a userland app / set of apps that will want a stdout but
I don't want it to go to the serial port.

A) There are two stdout redirection mechanisms in KOS, depending on
whether you're working at the kernel or userland level.

For the kernel level, you will want to use dbgio_set_printk() (defined
in arch/dbgio.c). This function will return the old printk in case you
just wanted to filter. For userland level, you can actually do something
evil and tricky (which may eventually be banned ;-), and replace the
printf pointer in the fundamental ABI. Make sure if you do this that you
put it back normal when your program exits.

We're working on a generic method for cleaning up resources such as
these, but it's going to have to wait until there is real process
support instead of just threads with loadable modules. Note that this
process support is not high on the priority list right now.


6.3

Q) Can I trace through KOS using GDB or similar?

A) Yes, in theory. It will run just like any other DC program (like a
libdream app) but you will have to be aware that there are interrupts
enabled and they are extremely relevant. They are used in things like
PVR page flipping and rendering, threading, and will be used other
places later on. Additionally, you can have things like the DC's boot
ROM itself being multitasked in a thread during CD access! So be
careful! If you are using userland programs it gets even trickier since
GDB will have no symbols for the program (it will instead believe that
you are just jumping into random data memory).

There is an effort to make a GDB stub that will work with KOS, but
nothing has materialized yet. Until then you might want to try one of
the GDB stubs meant for raw DC programs and see what happens.


--- End ------------------------------------------------------------

KOS Version Id: $Id: FAQ,v 1.1.1.1 2001/09/26 07:05:00 bardtx Exp $
